My name is Ron Okamoto,
and I'm really happy to welcome you to
this year's State of the Union for the
games industry and the games market,
Mac games market.
It's going to be really
interesting today.
What we're going to do is we're going
to talk a little bit about Mac games,
what's been happening on the platform,
and we're also going to get into some
things about some trends that we see,
two things that we think
will be important for you.
And we'll also be talking about
some ways to get your games done.
And when we're all, you know,
done with looking at them,
figuring out what's
going on with the market,
we'll then tell you maybe
even how to get published.
So that's the ground that we
want to cover this afternoon.
So let me start off by something
that I think all of you
guys are very well aware of,
which is the Mac market
itself is booming right now.
You can take a look at
the revenue trends there.
It's been really strong for us.
But what I think is important
for all of us here is,
if you stand back and think about it,
a lot of people have been saying, well,
gee, that's a lot of iPod revenue,
that's a lot of iTunes revenue.
You know, what's happening with the Mac?
What's happening with the things
that's running your games?
Well, if we take a look at that,
let's look at volume.
So here you have 2003, 4,
and 5 showing the steady growth
that we had in Mac volume.
But look what happens when
I lay 2006 on top of it.
You can see it's been really strong.
And Steve mentioned to you the strong
sales and the strong unit growth
that we've had in our Intel-based
portables over the last year as well.
So what's great for you guys is
that we think there's a fantastic
opportunity now for the Mac and gaming
because the volumes were up and we
know that people want to play games.
But the other thing that they do is
they also want native applications.
They want platform experiences and
things that really take advantage
of what makes a Mac app a Mac app.
And, you know, that's really what this
whole week's dedicated to.
And we're going to get
really deep into that.
But we want to just let you know,
you know,
there's some developers out there who
have been doing really great jobs.
I mean, there's a lot of you
guys doing a great job.
But two that come to mind.
One, for example, is Microsoft.
When Microsoft introduced their
most current version of Office,
they used a lot of really cool things.
Like transparency, Aqua, OpenGL,
and some stuff to make
their app look great.
And they have been having
fantastic business on it.
In fact, within Microsoft,
they're considered one of the stars
of business performance for last year.
Another great developer is
Delicious Monster and their
Delicious Library product.
You know, Will Shipley has integrated
EyeSight camera functionality
into his application,
really taking advantage of
some of the things that we
provide with the baseline Mac.
And we think that's another
opportunity for you because,
for example,
if you take a look at what we're doing
with all of our applications in general,
all third parties in general,
it's been really strong.
A half billion dollars
sold only in our channel,
only in our retail channel
over the last year.
So that's a lot of products moving.
And if we click down underneath that,
you can see that games is the number one
volume category in our retail stores.
Now, this is just our stores.
That's not everybody else
out there that's distributing
and selling Mac products.
So again,
one thing I really want to make clear is,
the games and Mac go
together extremely well,
and it's extremely strong.
And in fact,
sales are up 10% by revenue this year.
So again, these are pointing to a really,
really strong trend toward
what's happening with us today,
games on the Mac.
Now, another thing,
another way of measuring that
interest is taking a look at how
are people looking for these.
So for example,
if you look at our Apple store,
we search for everything, right?
People are looking for iPod accessories,
they're looking for, you know,
bags for their new MacBook,
and things like that.
Oh, I went a little too fast there.
Sorry, guys.
Anyway, it is within the top five of all
the searches that are going on.
And these are millions of
searches that are happening today.
So one thing I want to make clear
for everybody is that what's
happening here is that we've noticed,
and we know, that our Mac customers are
rewarding developers for a
great platform experience.
And what applies to Office and
Delicious Monster applies
to games as well.
So Mac customers want native games.
And right now, today,
we have some efforts going on there.
So for example, Universal Binaries,
a really big thing that
we introduced last year.
And we have to tell you,
the games community was one of the
fastest to jump on top of that.
So here we are today,
a little over a year
since we announced it,
212 days since we shipped
our first machine.
And take a look at some of the
great titles that are out there now.
Shipping Universal today, Aspire,
Blizzard, a lot of our great partners
have been doing a good job on
moving to Universal Binaries.
And we want to thank you for that.
But it's not just what's happening
with these kind of titles as well.
There's international involvement now.
There are some really interesting
things going on overseas.
And I want to show you one here
that we're particularly fond of.
And maybe you'll see why.
This game came from a
Chinese student developer.
This gentleman, his name is Ben,
I believe.
He is in Tangji University in Shanghai,
China.
And if you take a look
at what's going on here,
he's making some really
interesting things happen here.
I love this part, because you're going to
see a bunny eat a bull.
Look at that.
That's one mean bunny.
Anyway, you see this bunny eat this bowl,
but this is done by a student
developer using the Mac platform.
This is only on the Mac.
And these guys have a great
student effort going on there,
and I think it's just one of
many going around the world.
And I'll tell you,
the coolest experience I had was about
now about two and a half years ago.
I was at this university.
And these guys have these
great labs out there.
You know, they have a Mac lab,
they have a Windows lab,
and they have a Unix lab.
And when I went to visit them, they said,
"Man, the Mac lab is the most popular
on campus." Now for background,
there's not a lot of
Macs in China right now.
We're still growing that market,
but our penetration isn't nearly
what it is for Linux and Windows.
And so when I asked the guy, I said,
"Well, that's interesting.
How come this guy,
this student looks at me
like I'm crazy and says,
'Well, because it's cooler.'" And so,
you know,
if you have that kind of resonance
going on worldwide right now,
again,
we think not only are we doing great
things with our major developers,
but there's a seed here.
There's inspiration going on
for student developers as well.
And of course, there you go,
Animal Kingdom by Ben.
And of course, we got AAA titles,
things like Worlds of Warcraft,
which has been fantastic.
I mean, these guys were one of the
first to come out on universals,
and they've been having huge success.
Look at that, they got six and a half
million users today.
And a good, you know, not a good portion,
but there's a strong number
in there that's Mac users.
In fact, I dare say, you know,
some of you out in the audience could
probably count yourself in that group.
So again, there's an example of what's
happening with Mac development today,
we got the universal binaries,
we have student developers,
we have AAA titles,
all happening right now.
So that's what's going on right now.
But we also wanna look
a little bit forward.
So, there's two things we'd
like to highlight today.
Two things.
The first is online gaming.
How many of you guys here in this room
have actually played an online game?
Okay, the data's good.
Yeah, myself as well.
Let's take a look at this.
First of all,
PC remains the favorite gaming device,
primarily because of online games.
You know,
it's really what's been holding the
PC market together for the gaming
industry is the online phenomenon.
Take a look at this.
You know, Red Herring, the famous,
you know,
prognosticators of telling people where
the world's going technology-wise,
finance-wise, and otherwise,
they cite that online gaming
is one of the major trends.
And, you know, again,
just looking at you guys saying how many
of you guys have played online games,
we get it.
The second thing is, take a look at here,
you know,
of the Mac and PC online gaming,
46% of the users are
playing online games.
That's huge.
That's almost one out of every two.
Another thing is,
take a look at the growth of the
projected revenue in this segment.
You know, today, it's $1.1 billion.
By 2009, $3.5 billion.
This is a projection, but guys,
there's a lot of zeros in there,
so this is significant.
The last thing, and the thing that we
think is really great,
is if you take a look at
your typical Mac user,
and you take a look at
your typical Windows user,
that Mac user is broadband,
they're connected, and they're online.
They are a perfect
audience for online games.
And because of this,
what I want to do is introduce
you guys to Mark Lenstner.
Now Mark is with Linden Labs,
and these guys are doing some super
interesting things with online,
and games, but as well as a concept.
And I want him to go ahead and show you
guys all the cool stuff they're doing.
So Mark, thank you.
So I'm Mark Lenstner.
I'm a studio director at Linden Lab,
which means I run one of the engineering
studios or groups in Linden Lab.
By the way,
for those of you that missed it,
that's not a mock-up.
That is a Real Business Week cover.
The avatar on the cover there is
one of our most famous residents.
She's Anqi Cheng.
She's a virtual real estate developer.
And the real Anqi Cheng,
the person behind the avatar,
actually makes a six-figure real-life
income from her work in Second Life.
So you might want to listen up.
All right,
let me tell you a little bit about Linden
Lab before I delve into Second Life.
We're a really
[Transcript missing]
Now, Second Life is a virtual world,
or a metaverse, in which we simulate land
and physics and objects,
and we have a scripting
system and an economy.
And it's really big.
I mean, really big.
There are a lot of numbers
up there that are fun.
It's not just bigger than Boston,
it's three times bigger than Boston,
or twice as big as San Francisco.
Second Life is a whole ecosystem of
people and social groups working to do
everything from fun to serious business,
making use of our existing economy.
There's a whole in-world economy
that actually supports real payments.
And this creates, well,
let's go ahead and see it.
Let's go get the demo and see
what's going on in Second Life.
This is live,
we're running off the internet here live.
Now our heritage is certainly games,
but it's... Great,
someone's already talking to me in world.
Our heritage is certainly games,
but we've evolved into
something much bigger.
So for example,
we're starting here at Riverwalk.
Riverwalk is an in-world
cafe and art gallery,
outdoor art gallery with some,
let's say the Swan Boats from
Boston for you to be able to ride.
But something you can also do at
Riverwalk is you can play games.
So here is actually a chess
set that someone's built.
And over here is some
kind of interesting,
some kind of hex grid-based land game.
And you can see Mahjong off on the side.
Now everything in Second Life,
if I haven't mentioned it,
is built by the residents.
We don't build this.
It's all built by the
people in Second Life.
And people build a lot, a lot of games.
So there's all these kinds of games.
But there's a big variety of other kinds
of games that we're going to go see.
So for example,
let's see why I start going there.
There are board games and sports games.
There's golf.
There's yacht racing, which is really,
really cool.
There's giant 11-meter-tall
snail racing every Saturday.
It's really great, worth going to go see.
People build word games.
People build all sorts of games.
And hopefully,
I've got a bunch of friends here who
were going to be playing war games.
Let's see if they're actually there.
I think they're over in the other spot.
Let's go see them.
Ah, yes, there
Yeah, so you can fly over.
Let's see, this is,
this game is actually,
we have a games contest in Second Life.
Every year we get people
to build in games,
and this is one of this year's winners.
And they are building, this is great,
this is kind of like a
robot war style thing.
All these things are
objects they've built,
they're all scripted,
they're all having a
big fallout battle here,
which is really a lot of fun.
And we'll say something, thanks.
and David So I like this example
because this is kind of a new kind of
game that people have built in here.
All sorts of crazy stuff.
Now when it comes to games,
we have to talk about not
only just existing games,
but also a new trend of serious games.
Serious games are simulations and
games and training exercises designed
for research or for training purposes.
A good example is there's an emergency
response training program with a
complete simulated UC Davis campus
where people can set the hospital on
fire and all the fire trucks come out.
It's pretty wild.
There's also, someone did,
there's I think 13 courses,
university courses taught
in World this year,
and someone did a whole physics
optics lab where you can do
optics experiments in World.
So games can have a lot of other meaning.
This is an interesting place.
This is the
International Space Flight Museum built
in World with I think a building of
every rocket ever shot into outer space.
Complete models with note
cards and information about
all the things that are there.
But of course, you know,
we can have a little fun with it.
We can actually,
actually ride one of the rockets.
Here, I think we can go to the
Gemini rocket and ride it.
Alright,
there we are on the Gemini rocket,
and it's asking us to say
"blast off" when we're ready.
So, there we go.
So we're blasting off.
And I'll show the, we'll zoom out here.
As soon as we get, there we go.
So you can see the rocket
flying up into the space here.
There it is, flying out.
So the
International Space Flight Museum is
kind of a whole museum and simulation
of some of the facts where you can
do an interesting amount of learning.
We're now in orbit around the Earth,
and soon we'll actually go
up and see the museum there.
Interesting about entertainment is that
there's a wide variety of games and
entertainment in Second Life because
we have a wide variety of population.
There we go.
We have 43% female users.
Our age demographics exactly
match that of the United States,
and we have 25% international users.
So there's a wide variety
of things going out there.
It's one of the great things
you do when you do stuff online,
is that you get great,
diverse user bases.
Here's the International Space Station.
Endeavor loaded there,
and there's a bunch of stuff.
Actually, this whole simulation
allows you to fly to,
I think,
every planet in the solar system,
which is a tremendous amount of fun.
We're going to do a two-second see
if this is going to work today.
Yes!
We made it to Mars.
There we go.
There's actually the lander and stuff.
So there's a whole variety of things.
By the way, this is... All right.
Now, while there's this stuff
happening up here in space,
there's some more
real-life stuff going on,
which is, I think, getting interesting.
We're beginning to see a
connection between real life
and virtual online life.
So, we've recently had book readings
and signings by Cory Doctorow,
Professor Lawrence Lessig,
and Kurt Vonnegut.
There were,
the BBC held a simultaneous concert
in Scotland and in Second Life.
Susan Vega recently gave
an in-world concert.
And these kind of connections
between real life and Second Life,
or between things online
and things in the real life,
are beginning to expand
and do just great things.
Here's a commercial opportunity.
This is American Apparel,
an actual manufacturer of clothing,
that opened a virtual store.
So, many people say, "Well,
why have an online virtual 3D store
when you can actually just go to a
website?" And that's because shopping is,
well, a social experience, right?
So, here you can actually go into
a store and buy something.
So, you can actually go into
a store and buy stuff.
Oh, my God, there's Amy Webber.
I'll talk about her in just a second.
So, you can see a whole bunch of
people in this store hanging out.
We can actually look at the goods.
I like this great, here's a, yes,
the real world, the real world shirt,
the virtual shirt.
I can actually go buy stuff,
so I'm going to actually
buy this jacket right here.
They're all talking.
So I've actually bought-- so
that's actually using the virtual
and world currency to buy things.
Let's see, here's the jacket.
It's just dumped.
Actually, I get-- it's great.
I get one of every single color.
I'm going to go off and wear the red one.
So here's an interesting thing.
So we've got virtual versions
of real-life clothing.
There it is on me.
But there actually is a
connection back out again.
So this actually is-- you click there,
and it takes you to their website,
where you can actually buy the real-life
version of the virtual clothing that
you just bought that was a mimic of
a real-life-- my head's spinning.
Actually, what it's really great is
that if you buy it virtually,
you get 15% off.
You get a coupon.
You get a virtual coupon
that works in real life.
How cool is that?
Another aspect that's interesting
for developers and development here
is this store is a professional
development done by a professional
company that does virtual
development for real-life customers.
In this case, actually,
Amy Webber right there
is the lead developer,
I believe.
And actually,
I think she just mentioned Sarah.
Sarah Linden there actually
works in our office,
and she almost always wears
in virtual life what she is
actually wearing in real life.
People do the craziest things.
There are 20 companies now,
at last count, that I recently spoke to,
doing actual development in Second Life.
They're doing real things for the BBC.
They're doing things for companies
for several universities,
and here in the case of American Apparel,
building things.
And development in Second Life is a real,
well, there's a real business there.
We mentioned the economy.
There was a stat there
you might have seen,
$10 million U.S.
equivalent trading hands
every month in Second Life.
$1.4 million actually goes into
Second Life from customers' hands
and back out again into the market.
And that's just growing.
That's just a great thing.
Now,
last thing I want to point out is that,
how does all this happen?
All of this building
happens in Second Life.
So, building is an important thing.
I'm falling down on the ground.
I've gone to a sandbox,
which is a public area for building,
and so I have to apologize.
I have no idea what's going
to be in here when I get here.
We'll see all sorts of crazy stuff.
But I want to show you how
this all really happens.
This isn't magic.
It all starts... Whoops.
That's not what I wanted to build.
It all starts...
With a plywood cube.
There's a plywood cube.
We can make it bigger.
And so, notice that all building
happens in world,
creative,
that any resident can do these things.
I'm going to go off and
twist this a little bit.
You have the ability to pull in textures.
You can take any textures you want.
and apply them.
So actually there's a nice
multidisciplinary work in
building in Second Life for
which the Mac is just perfectly,
perfectly suited.
You have to do texturing and scripting.
There's a nice sphere.
Do you like the sound of creation?
It's one of the best things we've got.
So I'm going to go off
and build a little wither.
There's a little brass sphere.
Let's go off and make it some shiny,
because everything's
better when it's shiny,
and show you that it's physical.
Let's see, I think I can push it off.
Come on.
There it goes.
Oh.
[Transcript missing]
Well, where is it?
Well,
I just made it fly all over the place.
Yeah, well, you know,
the best laid demos.
Here, let's go off and make
the big pedestal bounce,
too.
Oh, I didn't make it physical.
Here, we'll make it physical.
Now, the great thing about--
How did that happen?
I don't know.
The great thing about Second Life is
that building happens in a social space.
All these green dots up here are people.
This is happening-- I'm going to
zoom out and get a little sense
of what's going on in this place.
This is a sandbox where people are
building the craziest of things.
And we've got some big
tree house going on there.
We've got some other pods and houses.
And one of the things
I wanted to show you is,
you can see over here,
here's a group of people Well, let's see.
Oddly enough, two of them are dancing.
But these people are building.
And building becomes a social
experience in Second Life,
which means they're
all helping each other,
and they're helping learn.
And it helps make the whole experience,
by being an online social experience,
just so much, so much,
so much more better.
OK, we're going to leave
Second Life now for the moment.
And I'll go back to my last little bit.
So we can get back to the slides.
So now just a few geeky details
about how we build this thing.
The client for Second Life is built
from a single source for both Mac,
Linux, and Windows.
Runs on all three.
It's universal binary.
We were universal binary within just a
few weeks of the shipping MacBook Pros.
We really love supporting
the Mac program.
And I was mentioning
in the other session,
our users are surprisingly-- they were
telling us they had MacBook Pros and
we were waiting for it faster
than we could get it out the door.
They loved it.
Mac users are loyal
users and early adopters.
It's all open GL for the rendering.
So that makes it easy.
Helps our cross platform.
And of course, the debugging tools in the
Mac are just great for it.
We compile with Xcode on the Mac.
And we make just extensive
use of all the Xcode features,
like distributed building and
zero link and all the abilities
to make building really,
really fast, which otherwise would
be really problematic.
Lastly, some other geeky things.
The actual back end simulation is
running in a huge rack of machines in
a building a couple blocks from here.
There's one process in
CPU for every 16 acres.
So if you do the math right now,
we're about 3,100 CPUs all running in
a giant grid computation simulation,
simulating all that land
and physics and stuff.
Lastly, just a note that the Mac fans,
Mac users,
are always just-- they're so loyal.
It's great.
So this is at the Space Flight Museum.
I was taking the screenshots for
stuff and planning things out.
And this is one of the creators.
And he walks up and starts talking to me.
And when he talks,
a PowerBook appears in front of him
that he's typing on every time he talks.
Just made it because he liked it.
Anyway, that's Second Life,
a great online game,
a great platform that integrates
and was built with Mac.
Thanks.
Let's see.
So that's one, online gaming.
I have it on good authority
that is the real Mark Lettseer,
not the Avatar,
just in case you were wondering.
Okay.
So, second trend,
casual games and casual gaming.
Again, this is another one.
So we talked about, first of all,
about online gaming.
Now let's talk about casual games.
Like a lot of things going
on in gaming right now,
casual games are big.
So let me just ask a question.
How many of you guys got
a game on your phone?
How many people got a game on the phone?
Okay.
A lot of people.
Not most.
Anyway, that's a lot of casual gaming.
But in addition to that,
there's a lot of casual gaming
going on on computers as well.
In fact,
it's the most popular segment title
that we sell in our retail stores.
So, first of all, audience, look at that.
You know,
we have over 100 million PC users
who say they're casual gamers.
Casual gaming is a business.
It's a quarter of a billion dollars.
So from that aspect, it's very large.
And consoles are now starting
to get on the bandwagon.
So originally, you know,
we always think of consoles
as being driving games,
first-person shooters,
and all that kind of stuff.
But more and more, with the trend of,
you know, the casual and the family
game becoming more prevalent,
we're seeing the consoles jump on board.
There were four conferences
this year just on casual games.
And, you know, some, you know,
it's interesting when you consider
what's been happening with some of the
first-person shooter kind of AAA stuff,
the emphasis now that's
moving in that direction.
And as a further proof point,
EA's Pogo site has, you know,
a million subscribers right now.
And so we think casual games
and online gaming are two trends
that are going to be very,
very different.
And so we think casual games
and online gaming are two trends
that are going to be very,
very different.
So Freeverse is involved in the
Mac gaming market on all sorts of levels,
and I want to go the wrong direction.
And I want to touch on four of them:
casual games,
original Mac game development,
which we're very excited about, PC ports,
and distribution.
And let's begin.
First, a casual game in today's market
has a very specific definition.
A casual game is a small game,
like 20 megabytes or less, downloadable.
A casual game has almost
no learning curve.
You can pick it up, put it down.
It's got a very small time commitment.
And all these things come together,
and I'm sure you've played them.
You've played Zuma or Snood or Bejeweled,
any number of these games, I'm sure.
Raise your hand if you've
played any of these games.
Everyone.
Yeah.
And casual gamers are
pretty much everyone.
Everyone who owns a Mac is
a potential casual gamer.
And the casual game market skews a little
older and skews a little more female.
And that's a good thing.
And Freeverse has been in the
casual game market for a while,
and we're seeing just great results.
Casual gaming on the Mac has never
been stronger than it is this year,
and Apple deserves a
lot of credit for that.
We're also big, big boosters of original
Mac game development.
Last year, we co-sponsored the original
Mac games programming contest,
which we'll be doing again this year,
with a great resource, idevgames.com.
So if you haven't been there,
you should check that out if you're
interested in doing Mac game development.
We think a Mac,
original Mac game made on the Mac and
made specifically for the Mac will
always be a better user experience
and will always be a better game than
a PC port or a game that's designed
without the Mac specifically in mind.
And the Mac has some great technologies
that you can plug into and it has
a design sense that just makes the
whole gaming experience much better.
And I'm going to talk about four casual
games that Freeverse is doing this year.
Wingnuts 2,
which you may have seen already,
came out two months ago.
And the other one I want to talk
about is a new suite of casual games
called the Big Bang Brain Games,
and specifically Big Bang Reaction.
So I guess let's talk about them.
Let me dive in.
First is Big Bang Reaction.
And this is, at its heart,
it's a simple puzzle game.
But, as I hope you'll see,
there's nothing simple about
the technologies we bring to it,
and the level of quality.
This is using all the same stuff you'd
see if you're trying to make a AAA title.
Open GL, beautiful sounds, scores,
and just...
Sounds not quite high enough to hear him.
But all of this quality,
all of this production value is brought
for what is basically a puzzle game,
and that's something I think
Freeverse has always tried to do.
Regardless of the scale of the game,
we've tried to make it as
high quality as possible.
And I think users really appreciate that,
especially Mac users.
They know what's happening.
So in this game, you're adding
You're adding balls,
and when you get to a certain level,
it explodes and can
cause a train reaction.
So let me just quickly
show you another level.
Let's see.
And so I guess the story behind this
game is that as if you caught Bertrand's
State of the Mac OS speech yesterday,
he was talking about the cinematic
experience they bring to the OS,
the wow factor.
And that's the language of games.
And it's being done with the technology
that's been developed for games.
And having the wow
factor is very important.
And also--
Easy to do on the Mac,
especially with the new
technologies they talked about
with core animation and stuff.
Those are all great things
for increasing the level of
quality in the finished product.
So as you can see,
if you know where to go,
this is a pretty big chain reaction.
And we're using a golf
metaphor for this game.
So if you look at the top,
this is a par-5 board.
And I'm two shots into it,
so I'm doing OK.
And that's Big Bang Reaction,
which is almost in beta and
will be out in the fall.
And the other game I wanted to show,
sorry about that, is Wingnuts 2,
which you may have seen already.
Again,
it's got very high production values,
soundtracks, it's an original Mac game.
You can only play this on the Mac.
And it takes a little while to load
because it's over 800 megabytes.
It's 30 levels.
Each level is hand-built with dozens of,
not that long on the machines
they give us a demo on.
But there's 30 different boss monsters,
and I'll just try and quickly show you.
Hopefully you can see that
it's a thing of beauty.
And this game also demonstrates,
in addition to the beautiful particle
effects and the use of OpenGL,
this also is a good example of
how we integrate Mac technology.
Because it's a Mac app, it runs windowed,
it runs full screen.
We use the iSight camera if it's
available for generating victory
pictures for your top score list.
We use core image effects.
And here's a mecha mode power-up,
which I'm going to get.
And notice that I just
turned into... Yeah,
I'm a badass right now.
And notice how I come apart.
I turn to individual rectangles
and they all spin off.
Anyway, that's the very first few
seconds of level one of Wingnuts.
And I will get out of that.
Now going back to this.
We also chose this year
to do some PC ports,
which is a first.
We've done some publishing of
other people's PC ports before,
but Freeverse thought what with
all the new technologies coming
on and the Intel transition,
now is really the perfect time to
get into the PC porting market.
And we chose two very specific titles.
And I'd like to reveal a
little bit about our thinking,
just so you can get a sense of how
we're evaluating the Mac game market.
First is Legion Arena.
Legion Arena is hitting an underserved
part of the Mac gaming market,
we feel.
It's a historical war game,
and it's a beautiful game.
It's fully 3D.
It's in the genre of Rome Total War.
And there isn't much
like that for the Mac.
And so we thought that would
be a good one to bring over.
And that one shipped last month,
I'm happy to report.
It also has,
because it's a historical war game,
and that has its own sort of
sub-segment of the market,
it will continue to sell, we think,
for a while.
And that's very important
from a business side,
because of the nature of the PC port,
you're probably going to
miss the first few months,
and probably a lot of the
advertising buzz around the
launch of the game initially.
And so if a game is going to
spike and then go away in a year,
you've missed a lot of
your window of opportunity.
So Legion Arena will have longevity,
and we expect it to sell in retail
and from our store for a long time.
The other game I'm very
happy to talk about,
is Heroes 5 of Might and
Magic by Ubisoft.
This is a AAA title,
and it's a title that has
a long history on the Mac.
All previous four versions
made it over to the Mac,
and if you've been using the
Mac for more than a few years,
I'm sure you're familiar
with the franchise.
It's a great game also.
Again, we wanted to play it.
Both Legion and Heroes have
no console version.
And in terms of maximizing
it as a business venture,
we thought that was important.
If you want to play
either of these games,
and people do want to play them,
you have to have a console version.
And if you want to play
either of these games,
you have to do it on your
desktop or your laptop.
And again,
like in Age of Empires or a Civilization,
we think Heroes 5 is
the sort of game which,
once we do a kick-ass
Mac version and get it out there,
it'll sell for hopefully years.
And so just wanted to let you
know a little bit about why we
chose these specific titles.
And then there's the final part
of the points I want to speak to,
which is marketing and distribution,
I mean.
And how do we get these games out?
Thank you.
The retail side is interesting.
We have a European and Asian partners
to help us get into those markets.
In North America, the Apple stores,
I guess, and internationally now,
the Apple stores are a great resource.
I think there's almost 160 stores,
and that's essential for getting
your games in front of people who
aren't necessarily Mac game players,
even though they're Mac users.
But they're potential customers,
so we have to beat them.
And of course,
we maintain a great online store and
try to keep our face in the press.
But casual games present
a special problem for us.
Casual games,
because they're potential customers,
are everyone with a MacBook and
everyone with an iMac,
or whatever Mac they have,
they're not necessarily
self-identified as gamers.
A lot of them won't even say,
are you a computer game player?
And they'll say no.
And then you ask them if they play Zuma,
and they say every day.
And because of that,
they're also not geeky.
So they won't go to a version tracker.
They don't even know
version tracker exists.
They might not read Macworld,
and they don't consider
themselves Mac addicts.
And so how do we reach these people?
And so we think we have a solution.
And I'm proud to announce this
week we launched MacFun.com,
which is the premier
Mac casual gaming portal.
We've been talking to and
partnering with some of the
larger casual game developers,
PopCap and GameHouse, et cetera,
as well as Mac-specific developers
like Brian Greenstone of Pangea.
And so what we hope to do is we hope to
create a place where all this original
Mac development and the more general
casual game market can come together,
and you can get the best Mac experience.
It'll look great in Safari.
All the games will be pre-vetted to
make sure that they run great on OS X.
And it's launching this week,
so you can go check it out.
And if any of you are interested
in developing casual games or
talking about larger projects,
we want to talk to you.
So come up to me after the session,
or just drop me an email.
It's ian at freeverse.
It's very easy to find.
And now I'd like to introduce Ron Travis.
Oh, sorry.
Travis Brown of Apple,
who will talk a little bit about
putting this OS X technology to work.
Thank you.
Thank you, Ian.
Great games require great technology,
and Mac OS X is filled with
an array of great technologies
that you have the ability to
take advantage of in your game.
So what I want to do in this section is
actually take a look at the technologies
that are relevant for games and sort of,
you know,
put the context around them so you
understand how our technology portfolio
can be used in your game efforts.
So there are several key technologies,
areas that most games almost always have.
They have almost always graphics.
They have strong audio experiences.
They, in many cases,
have to exceed the input of a
keyboard and mouse and use joysticks,
game pads, and other forms of input.
And also, games require certain degrees
of optimization that aren't
necessarily typical in your
common application software.
So we'll speak to a tool story as well.
So what we're going to do is take
each one of these categories and
sort of drive down into it and talk
about the technologies in Mac OS X,
and what they're important
for you to know about.
I'll also talk about trends
and certain technologies,
particularly in the graphic area,
that I think you need to be aware about.
Then also, I will talk about new Leopard
developments where appropriate.
So let's talk about graphics.
Games are synonymous with graphics.
I mean, you're trying to create
an immersive experience,
and therefore,
every pixel on the display counts
in terms of that experience.
And what almost all games use
on the platform is OpenGL.
And for those who aren't
aware of what OpenGL is,
OpenGL is an industry
standard graphics API.
It came out of sort of science and CAD.
It was originally used
principally for 3D,
but more and more we're seeing
it used pervasively throughout
all categories of applications.
But since it has such
a strong 3D heritage,
it's a sort of a foundational
technology for games.
And I'll talk about
that in the next slide.
You have also OpenGL is what
we use in the platform of
distraction for graphics hardware.
Because we're going to ship ATI, NVIDIA,
and Intel GPUs in our systems,
and you want an API that's going
to abstract you from some of the
complexity or specifics of the
underlying graphics processor.
We also are increasingly
moving OpenGL as a fundamental
component of Mac OS X graphics,
all Mac OS X graphics.
Many of you have seen some
dazzling demos so far at WWDC,
and almost all those dazzling
demos are powered by OpenGL.
So let's really talk
about games and OpenGL.
I'm going to bring up sort of a,
you know, go in the time machine,
go back, and take a look at a sort of a,
you know, a seminal game in, you know,
3D graphics and hardware
acceleration in particular.
And that's going to be Quake 3 Arena.
It looks a little bit dated,
but it's going to,
it's an interesting point
because it points to a trend.
You know, Quake 3 Arena in its day was
absolutely cutting edge in
terms of what it was doing.
It was very fluid, real-time,
hardware accelerated
graphics using OpenGL.
It also used some pretty cutting
edge techniques for its day.
So if we actually take a look at that
and look at the sort of complexity
that was involved in the scene,
we have around 10,000 polygons.
We also have a technique
called multi-texturing.
And for those of you who aren't really
familiar with textures and polygons,
obviously the wireframe
represents the vertex data or the
polygon data that's being drawn,
at least submitted to the graphics card.
And the textures are the images that are
laid on top of it to create the scene.
And so Quake is using these techniques to
create a reasonably immersive experience.
Now, the reason I have this slide is
because this is where a lot of
games and entertainment software
today still sort of gravitate to,
these techniques, a lot of texturing and
a lot of vertex data.
And at least, you know,
basic vertex data submitted in ways
that go back a long way with OpenGL.
Now, I don't know if many of you
saw the -- Peter Graffagnino's
Graphics and Media State of the
Union yesterday where we showed an
interesting application from ATI,
which is something called Toy Shop.
And the reason why we're showing this at,
you know,
both here and in the Graphics and
Media State of the Union and later
in OpenGL sessions is because this
is representative of people using
the modern capabilities of GPUs as
exposed through modern OpenGL or
the latest OpenGL techniques.
And you can see there is a quantum
leap in visual capabilities where
I have a scene that has not only
a lot more geometry information,
but you can see on the water
ripple effect on all the windows.
You can see puddles effects
on the road surface.
You can even see rain falling.
And this is an interesting
technology demo.
And you'll have an opportunity to see
it again in the OpenGL optimization
session or at least see a video of
it in the OpenGL optimization session
because it is representative of,
like, the absolute cutting edge
techniques that you're able to do.
Many of these things, details,
are actual physical simulations
executed on the GPU.
So if we actually sort of take
a look at the complexity here,
we see that there's a tremendous
increase in the amount of
information you can throw at a GPU,
okay?
And the GPUs in our system at
the high end are capable of
really moving a lot of geometry.
And there's also new techniques
they're going to talk about in a bit
to submit this much geometry to get
in the scene and get it rendered.
In addition,
we have something called programs, okay?
Now, modern GPUs are programmable.
You're no longer limited to the
sort of fixed function that was
available initially in OpenGL.
You can actually change the way
vertices and/or polygon data or,
you know,
pixel rasterization happens or fragment
rasterization programmatically to
meet the needs of your application.
And that is really, really powerful,
and that's how, you know,
how Toy Shop is getting that
quantum leap in capability,
and you can do it too
in your applications.
So obviously the key to sort
of unlocking that is going to
be the OpenGL shading language.
Now, we've had the OpenGL shading
language on Mac OS X since Tiger.
We've improved it
incrementally along the way.
But this is going to be
a high-level language.
It's going to enable you to use a
C-like language to get access to the
programmable features of the latest GPUs.
The interesting thing is, you know,
Peter Graffagnino brought up in
his slides yesterday that GPUs,
programmable GPUs, you know,
basically started happening around 2003,
and you actually program them through
some low-level exposure extensions to
OpenGL called ArbVertex and ArbFragment,
which are very much like assembly
language and very difficult to program.
You know, GLSL sort of makes it
significantly more accessible
because it is a C-like language.
It compiles and has a lot of
language features that you're used
to in a higher-level language.
So you're really going to want to
check out the using the OpenGL shading
language session because not only
are we going to actually show you,
uh, details about OpenGL and its usage,
we're also going to have, uh,
Rob from ATI, uh,
who worked on the Toy Shop demo,
come give you, uh, some, uh,
information on some of the
programs and shaders that they
used to create that awesome demo.
[Transcript missing]
So let's talk about
multi-threaded OpenGL.
So what we've done for Leopard
is an exciting new feature,
where we've realized that a
lot of applications themselves
tend to be single-threaded,
particularly games.
And games also tend to run open
at a sort of open-loop frame rate.
They're driving as hard as they can
to get as many frames as they can.
So what this means is games are
pushing hard against the OpenGL stack.
And the OpenGL stack has to do a little
bit of work to actually get commands
ready to go up to the GPU so the
graphics card can actually draw them.
So in Leopard,
you're going to be able to take and
tell the OpenGL stack that it needs to
farm out some of that task of preparing
the list of things to do for the
GPU and move that onto a second thread.
So in a multi-core or a
multi-processor machine,
you're going to get a net benefit.
Because let's say, for example,
in this somewhat contrived example-- it's
a little more complicated than this--
if I have an application that's spending
60% of its time in my game logic,
it's spending 30% of its time
pushing up against OpenGL,
waiting for the
OpenGL framework to do things,
and you have another remaining 10%
of time spent doing other stuff.
If you turn on multi-threaded OpenGL,
we're able to take maybe 20% to 25%
of the work spent in the OpenGL stack
and farm that on the second thread,
which suddenly makes your main
thread have about 20% to 25% more
cycles available for it to push
harder and generate more frame rate.
Now,
this is an opt-in option for developers,
because not all OpenGL applications
are suitable to have this enabled,
because the way they use OpenGL may
induce synchronization points,
where we actually have to either check
with the OpenGL framework or possibly
even through the driver to the card
to determine some current state.
So things like glget will create
these synchronization points,
which means that we cannot get
the parallelism we need with
a multi-threaded OpenGL stack.
So you want to really watch
your state management.
And to help you do that,
the OpenGL and Mac OS X section is
going to talk about conceptually
the multi-threaded GL stack.
And also,
it'll be touched a little bit in
the optimization sessions as well.
So let's look at where this
gets us in terms of performance.
We've taken Doom 3 and World of
Warcraft and done before and afters.
So you look at, in the case of Doom 3,
when it's off,
we're getting about 109 frames
per second on a Mac Pro.
When we turn it on,
we hit 160 frames per second.
And again,
this is just throwing a switch.
On World of Warcraft, Ironforge,
which is a very crowd-intensive
benchmark-type scene,
we're getting 48 frames
per second with it off.
We flip it on, and we're getting around
90 frames per second.
With World of Warcraft in a large
outdoor scene on a mountaintop spinning
around where you see the mountain
ranges and you see all the trees and
it's pretty geometrically complicated,
you go from 68 to 132 frames per second.
So this is the type of performance you
can get with our new multi-threaded
OpenGL stack in Mac OS X Leopard.
Now, obviously if you're here, you know,
you're not getting this information
in the core animation session.
So I wanted to take a little
bit of time to cover some of
it because core animation,
although we've shown it in
the use of application UI,
for example, in Time Machine,
which makes use of core animation,
we also, I want to make it clear that
it's very appropriate potentially
for casual games as a 2,
2.5D sort of a sprite engine that's built
in and ready to go in Mac OS X Leopard.
And it's got a couple of interesting
details you want to check out.
One is this concept of
automatic or implicit animation,
where all my application,
my game would need to do is
put graphic elements on layers,
tell core animation where the layers are,
and then tell core animation what
needs to happen with the layers,
like the layer needs to go
across the screen and fade out.
And core animation takes it from there.
It basically, you know,
on its own rendering thread,
its own rendering engine,
takes it and animates that scene.
You're out of the business of
driving each frame of the animation.
And this enables us to
do all sorts of stuff.
With making it a really efficient
system where we're able to ensure,
you know, do our best to optimally draw
the scene and ensure that
we get maximal frame rate.
And also in simple scenes,
we don't draw too fast and end
up trying to draw 3,000 frames
per second on a trivial scene,
even when the user's
only going to see 60.
So I really think this should
be interesting for you guys
to check out for casual games.
Let's talk a little about audio.
Our solution for audio
for games in particular,
because they need very
environmental sound,
very sort of detailed, rich sound,
much like they need with graphics,
we use OpenAL.
And that's a 3D positional audio stack.
And it works pretty simply.
You have a listener,
and you have audio emitters
around in a three-space scene.
On the basis of that layout
and where things are moving,
an audio equivalent will be rendered.
And you can use that to represent that
and sent through two or more channels.
And the actual API is
modeled after OpenGL.
And so it's really conceptually
easy for developers to pick up
if they're familiar with OpenGL.
It's also multi-platform.
So if you want to take
your title across platform,
the OpenAL implementation is
available on several other platforms.
And then a key note is we added
this because of popular request.
A lot of game developers
looked at Core Audio and said,
hey, this is great.
It's powerful.
But we want something a little
more tuned to our needs.
And so we actually found
this in open source,
brought it into Mac OS X,
did an optimal implementation,
and put it in Mac OS X Tiger.
So what we're doing, well,
here's a quick example of some
AAA titles that are shipping with OpenAL.
Things like Doom 3,
the Mac version's sound is
implemented on top of OpenAL,
Unreal Tournament, Harry Potter.
And there are about 25 other titles,
a lot of casual games
that are using OpenAL.
and David Levin.
So what are we doing
with OpenAL and Leopard?
Well, like OpenGL,
OpenAL is continuing to be moved forward
by its standards body and its community.
So there's a new version
called OpenAL 1.1,
and that's being included in Leopard.
And it has a couple of new features, one,
the ability to capture sound.
It also has distance models,
so you can better replicate
fall-off of sound as things,
you know, go into,
as sounds go into the distance.
It also has reverb,
occlusion and obstructions that
are going to be very useful when
you're trying to recreate the sound
environment based on maybe what
you're rendering with graphics.
So if, like, for example,
you have a first-person shooter
and someone ducks in a door
or goes around the corner,
you're going to be better able to create
the equivalent audio representation
that matches your visual representation.
It also has static buffers,
which are sort of like I talked
about with buffer objects in OpenGL,
a data flow optimization.
In this case,
this enables your application to hold
onto the sound data versus having to
have copies in the OpenAL framework.
So it's a very, very good way to do
performance optimization.
So let's talk briefly about input.
Now, input is interesting,
because this is actually
surprisingly complicated.
You think graphics and
sound are complicated,
but input is really, really complicated.
So how we sort of try to
simplify it is by USB HID,
or the Human Interface
Device Specification.
We've actually taken our I/O, you know,
I/O Kit framework,
which is a device driver
model in Mac OS X.
We have a set of classes that deal with,
you know, input devices, HID devices.
Last year,
we asked for feedback in this area,
and we got a lot of feedback.
We got a lot of feedback from the users,
and we got a lot of
feedback from the users.
And we got a lot of
And we got some great feedback at WWC,
and, you know, we've taken it to heart,
we've listened,
and we've actually made some
changes to USB HID and Leopard.
And what we've done is to create a group
of higher-level APIs that enable you to
have easier -- make it easier for the,
you know, discover and access
and parse HID devices,
because part of the trick is a
gamepad can have n number of buttons.
You know, a joystick can have a throttle,
a top hat.
It can even have foot pedals, rudder,
you know, they're used for rudders
or area -- you know,
used for rudders.
And making sense of those
is pretty complicated.
So we used to do this with HID utilities,
which is some sample code,
and we're actually sort of
superseding that with the new HID,
you know,
new HID APIs and I/O Kit in Leopard.
Now, we still have a little bit of areas
that we want more information on.
One is the issue of UI.
Do you want in-game UI for configuration?
Do you want us to provide sort
of raw API for configuration?
And you'll take care
of the game experience.
And then, you know,
do you want us to create a -- you know,
create Aqua sort of
UI and componentry for it?
We're also interested in getting
feedback on how you want to
handle out-of-spec devices,
because there's a fair
number of devices out there,
like mice that report they have
255 buttons and stuff like that,
which can create issues when you're
trying to configure your game.
If you want to give us some feedback,
why don't you send it to Craig Keithley,
our I/O technology evangelist.
His e-mail is up there.
And he's the one sort of
championing this issue at Apple.
So, quick note about tools.
Obviously, tools is all about Xcode.
If you're developing on Mac OS X from C,
C++, Objective C, you're going to want to
be doing it with Xcode.
But I wanted to make a specific
call out to some tools,
some performance tools that are
key to unlocking the performance
of your entertainment title.
And that's going to
be -- I went too fast.
Oop.
So that's going to be,
it's going to be Shark,
it's going to be OpenGL Profiler,
and it's going to be Driver Monitor.
And you can learn more about
these tools and the OpenGL,
optimizing OpenGL applications,
we're going to take OpenGL Profiler,
and we'll also take Driver Monitor and
Shark together and teach you
how to optimize your graphics.
And then also,
you'll learn more about Shark and sort
of algorithmic level debugging and using
performance analysis and debugging tools.
Now there's some other interesting
tools that are out there that don't
require C or C++ level of development.
And that's going to
be higher-level tools,
and these are game
development environments.
And one great example is one
done by a company called Unity.
Now, instead of actually coding
a game from scratch,
you're going to be able to use a tool
like Unity to focus at the gameplay
and the sort of art level and,
you know, geometry level,
and build your game at this high level,
and then have the
Unity game system really,
you know, enable that game to be
developed without you having
to think about physics engines,
graphics engines,
all the sort of details you might
if you were starting at a low level.
So it's a great high-level tool.
It's fantastic.
It's fantastic for game development,
and I want to invite David Helgason
to stage to show it to you.
Thanks, Travis.
So it's been a great session.
We've learned a lot about
the opportunities for games,
Mac games, ways to publish them.
But this is the Worldwide
Developer Conference,
so a lot of you are
probably asking yourselves,
how do we actually tap into
this and create the games?
And one great answer is Unity.
So let's just look at that.
Unity is a simple but powerful
game development environment.
It's one application only.
So you just sit down with that,
and you create your
entire game inside it.
It enables you to create stunning
3D games in an amazingly short time.
and it's fully featured,
meaning we just hand-picked all the
most powerful game technologies,
put them together,
and at your disposal in the menus and
in a very nicely laid out application.
So this includes the most incredibly
beautiful OpenGL graphics,
Unity ships with dozens of shaders
and 12 full-screen image effects,
which can make your
game look really great.
Another nice thing,
cool thing about games is
immersive environments.
And the easiest and most powerful
way to create those is using physics.
So Unity includes a full version
of the Geophysics engine,
which is probably the most scalable
and powerful physics engine out there.
And we made it really easy to use,
so you define how your
objects should behave,
material properties,
and you set it to work.
Of course, Unity has character animation,
so you can import your animation.
I've got animations from Maya from
pretty much every 3D program,
and just set it to play.
Now Unity is an application,
it's not an API.
So instead of mucking around with tens
of thousands of lines of C++ code,
you get a flexible scripting environment.
It supports JavaScript, C#,
and a dialect of Python.
And it's super-powered,
it's JIT-compiled, so the JavaScript,
for instance, is 20 times faster than
your normal JavaScript.
And that's just really nice to use.
The last thing that is at
the core of Unity is the
no-hassle art asset workflow.
And I'm going to show it to you,
because it's kind of hard to explain,
but it just makes it very,
very easy and efficient
to get all the art,
whether it's textures, audio,
or 3D models, into Unity.
So, I think we'll... Oh yeah,
before we actually put
out Unity as a product,
we ate our own dog food
and created the Goo Ball,
which you may have heard about.
It was published by Ambrosia
one and a half years ago,
and it's just still a gorgeous game.
You can find it on the net.
So, let's just look at Unity and
see how easy it is to use.
So you see up there, Unity,
gorgeous Cocoa application,
totally lickable.
And up there, you have,
we've actually preloaded it with an
early version of Tiki Magic Mini Golf,
which is in production by Freeverse.
So up there,
you have your normal 3D view,
kind of like, you know,
in any 3D application,
you can pan around your level,
select objects, move them into place,
build levels from there.
To the right,
you have an overview of your objects,
your files, very nice to kind of,
everything is drag and drop.
And down here, you have a game view,
where anytime you want,
you just press the play button,
and play the game as it is right now.
So this is a mini golf game,
so you get to drive this
ball around those fanciful,
tricky levels.
Let's just bounce it around for a second.
Whoa.
So Unity has a million features to
make your game look really gorgeous.
One category of those
is full-screen effects.
So one of my favorites
is the glow effect.
So let's go and pick the camera and
add a glow effect to the whole game.
Image effects,
you see the 12 image effects we ship,
we're going to pick glow.
So it pops up here, and you see there's
several properties to it.
Let's just play the game
and see how it looks.
And if we turn it off and on again,
we're going to see how nice
it makes the game look.
And kind of tune the properties,
it's all drag and drop.
Oh, that's a bit much.
Cool.
Perfect.
It looks great.
Maybe the color, color picker,
everything is very, always, 10.
Yeah.
Another thing which is
important when you're making
games is getting all the art,
all the textures and 3D models
to look great in context.
And I think the ground there
looks a bit washed out.
So let's pick the ground texture.
Here we just pause the
game while changing it.
There's the ground texture.
It's just a Photoshop file
with layers and whatnot.
But we're going to open it in preview,
because it's faster.
So I'm going to just-- let's
just up the contrast a bit so
it doesn't look so washed out.
Cool?
Looks great.
So save the file.
Switch back to Unity,
and this is the no-hassle
art asset workflow.
However you change your files,
they just get imported
into Unity right away.
This is cool for textures,
but it also works for 3D models.
So put in your Maya binary files,
your Cinema 4D files,
your Cheetah 3D files,
your Blender files.
You change them,
it updates in Unity across all
your levels at the same time.
That just blows your mind.
And it's really nice when you
have to change and modify the game
to make it look and feel right.
To have this tight loop of tuning.
So now we've worked on
the look of the game,
so let's go and add some interactivity.
I made a fan for this,
which will work as an obstacle.
It's made in Maya,
so we'll just drag it in.
Move it into place.
This is a fan.
In front of it, it has this trigger
area marked with blue,
and everything that's going to
enter the trigger area is going
to be affected by the trigger.
So we can just rotate it so it's
kind of in front of the bridge.
That's an obstacle.
Now, we need a trigger effect,
so we wrote a trigger script.
And that's just a few lines
of JavaScript in this case.
What it does is it takes the object
that gets in front of it and pushes it.
That's going to be the fan effect.
So if we switch back to Unity,
we just drag the fan effect onto the fan.
Cool.
Yeah, and try to play it.
It's rotating, it's animated in Maya.
Of course.
And the bulb gets pushed over.
So we've got an obstacle.
It's probably a bit hard,
but switching back to the fan script...
We see there is a force
variable at the top,
set to two initially,
and if we look it back into Unity,
We're going to see that
the force variable,
like all member variables,
show up in the inspector,
so we can just tune it in there
without having to change the code.
It's really cool if you have graphic
artists tuning the game for you.
So let's set it to
something more reasonable,
and play the game again.
This is still a mini-golf game.
Yep, and now it's actually possible
to complete this level.
Now this way,
this game is kind of half-made,
it probably needs two,
three more months to finish.
But once you're finished with it,
you want to be able to deploy it.
And then you just go to the file.
Build, and you get to choose between:
build for the web,
build as a dashboard widget,
OS X universal binary,
a couple of other non-universal binaries,
and then Windows.
I think we're just going
to go with the web,
build and run, give it a name.
Now what Unity does is takes
all the assets together,
all the scripts, compiles it,
optimizes it, and puts it into one file
which can be put on the web.
And that's exactly what we get here.
And the same game inside Safari.
I think we already made
it as a dashboard widget,
so if we bring up the dashboard.
Same game, just play it.
Same game, play it.
All from the same source.
So now it's ready to be published,
so I guess we'll take it to ION.
That's pretty much it.
Let me see.
Last slide.
Slide, please.
So I'm David Helgason.
Go to our website, download the demo.
It's a one-month free demo.
It includes a lot of different tutorials
on how to make different types of games.
And just to give you an overview,
Codemasters is doing a game with this.
Freeverse is doing two.
We've got a small game startup with seven
people doing an immersive third-person
game set in Jerusalem with hundreds of
characters and cars at the same time.
So it's really scalable.
And yeah,
after the session I'll be around,
so come talk to me.
Thank you, David.
Okay, so we've been able to take a
look at a lot of stuff today.
So, three great developers doing some
interesting things on the platform.
And before we go,
what we wanted to do is kind of
give you a little bit of a look at
still what's ahead for the week,
because Travis told you
a little bit about stuff.
And so, let's take a look at it.
So, first of all,
if you're tired and all this
makes you want to go play a game,
go down to the first floor
and go have yourself a blast.
Second thing is, there's some lunch talks
that are coming on.
There's Marketing Your Games and
Garage Games.
They'll be talking about their
tools and engine as well.
That's coming up later on in the week.
We have more sessions,
and these sessions will really
give you a little bit more insight
to some of the technologies that
Travis has outlined for you.
Core Audio, Go-To-Market again, OpenGL,
Optimizing OpenGL,
and Performance Analysis and Debugging.
Take a look at those sessions,
because they'll really help you out.
Another very interesting thing, again,
you know, it's not just about doing it.
We think we'll take the opportunity
of having you guys here to come out
and actually meet the publishers.
So, you can see here,
tomorrow night at 6.30,
we'll have an event where
you actually have a chance
to meet the game publishers.
Come talk to these guys,
and if you guys have been
working on anything and you
want to get it out there,
here's your chance to
meet them and hook up.
Now, before we're done done,
I want you guys to meet Andy.
Andy, stand up.
Now, I'll tell you why.
Wait.
Andy is our
Developer Relations Games Partnership
Manager.
He's a really important guy.
He's your number one contact for things
that are going on inside of Apple.
So, if you have any questions
or anything else like that,
come see Andy.
And with that, what I want to do is
thank you for attending.
And our presenters today,
with the exception of Travis,
had to go to the OpenGL session.
They agreed to stick around afterwards.
So, if you guys want to
come up and talk to him,
go right ahead.
But anyway, thank you for coming to
the State of the Union.
Have a great day.
conference.